---
layout: single
title:  "No more failures"
categories: coding
tags: [Github, DSA in Python, ML]
toc : true
---
## Reflection
I was determined to post every day this summer about the things I have learned each and every day, but failed on the second day. While not keeping the promise I made to myself once can be considered as a mistake, repeating to keep failing cannot. I will make sure to not let this blog be a failure, but a  progress.

## What I Learned

### Github

* How to add category, tags to my blog
* How to add table of contents to my blog

### DSA in Python

* Some standard data types of Python:
*   Numbers (int, float, long, complex)...
*   String --> 
*   Some built-in functions regarding String: .strip() ~ .trim(), .count("")
*   List "[ ]"
*   Tuple "( )" --> immutable list, but slightly more efficient
*   Dictionary "[key : value, ...]"
*   Set

* Function vs Method in Python
* A function does not belong to a class and it is implemented outside of a class. ex) print()
* A method belongs to a class and can be only implemented with objects inside of a class ex) upper()

> class Weight():
>     weight = 100
>
>     # Defining a method
>     def to_pounds(self):
>         return 2.205 * self.weight
>
> # Defining a function
> def to_pounds(kilos):
>     return 2.205 * kilos
>
> # Calling a method on an object.
> w = Weight()
> pounds = w.to_pounds()
>
> # Calling a function on an object
> kilos = 100
> pounds = to_pounds(kilos)

### ML

* What is parameter?
* M = number of training examples
* X = inputs = features = attributes
* Y = outputs = target variable
* N = number of features in our training sample
* What is Gradient Descent?
* Batch Gradient Descent vs Stochastic Gradient Descent?
* What is normal equation and how do you derive normal equation?


