---
layout: single
title:  "Finding Minimum in Rotated Sorted Array"
categories: coding
tags: [LeetCode]
toc : false
---

# *Finding Minimum in Rotated Sorted Array*

Suppose an array of length n sorted in ascending order is rotated between 1 and n times. For example, the array nums = [0,1,2,4,5,6,7] might become:

[4,5,6,7,0,1,2] if it was rotated 4 times.

Given the sorted rotated array nums of unique elements, return the minimum element of this array.

You must write an algorithm that runs in O(log n) time.


#### Example

Input: nums = [3,4,5,1,2]
Output: 1
Explanation: The original array was [1,2,3,4,5] rotated 3 times.

### Approach 1: 

The part that really threw me off was the fact that this had to be done in O(log n) time.
I cannot simply iterate through the list since that will incur O(n) time.
I have to do something like divide and conquer... maybe utilize binary search in some way?

I knew binary search takes O(log n) time to find the index of an element in an array, and that is the only algorithm I could come up with that can do that in that efficient time.
Given that the given array is sort of sorted, I became certain that I could use logics similar to that of binary search.

But how?

Since we are not guaranteed a sorted list, we cannot just simply copy and paste binary search implementation. Here is my systematic approach:

1. Check if the len(nums) == 1 or if it is already sorted --> return nums[0] immediately
2. Initialize lo,hi,mid values to find the discontinuity in the array ('critical point' in which it is decrementing)
3. If nums[mid+1] > nums[mid] --> return nums[mid + 1]
4. If nums[mid-1] > nums[mid] --> return nums[mid]
5. Else, update lo = mid + 1 or high = mid

### Implementation:

```python
class Solution:
    

    def findMin(self, nums):
        if len(nums) == 1 or nums[-1] > nums[0]:
            return nums[0]
        lo,hi = 0, len(nums) - 1
        mid = lo + (hi - lo) // 2
        if nums[mid] > nums[mid + 1]:
            return nums[mid+1]
        if nums[mid - 1] > nums[mid]:
            return nums[mid]
        if nums[mid] > nums[0]:
            lo = mid + 1
        else:
            hi = mid - 1
        
```

#### Complexity Analysis:

Time Complexity:O(log n) where n is the length of the list

Space Complexity: O(1)


### Reflection

Through this questions, I learned that using a binary search whenever there is a sorted list might be an idea.
I feel like it is thins kind of intuition that really will prepare me for the interview questions.

Let's not get discouraged by the fact that I was not able to solve the question within 30 minutes, but be thankful for my effort:)





